Hello.  My name is Lars Brinkhoff, and I have the honor today to
interview Barbara Liskov.

We are going to talk about the early development of the CLU
programming language, and in the end I will present a small hello
world example using a PDP-10 emulator.

Hello Barbara, I'm very happy to talk to you.

First, I understand CLU was influenced quite a bit by Lisp.  In your
CLU history paper you write that you have used Lisp extensively.  Was
that during your time at Stanford?

Which machine was Lisp running on?  Did you use the PDP-1 or PDP-6 at
the McCarthy's AI lab?  What was programming like at that time; did
you use punched cards or teletypes?

I understand you first came to MIT in 1972.  It seems you were somehow
associated with Jack Dennis' Computation Structures Group, is that
correct?

But you were also associated with Licklider's Dynamic Modeling group,
at least using their PDP-10 computer.  Why did you work on the PDP-10
rather than Multics?

The PDP-10 ran the Incompatible Timesharing System.  I understand
there were two ways to pronounce the short form of the name: I.T.S. or
its.  Which do you prefer?

Your CLU history paper says the first version of CLU was written in
Lisp and generated Lisp output, is that correct?  Did you use the
Maclisp dialect?

You write you changed to Muddle due to political reasons.  What
reasons were those?

What was programming like at MIT; were you (still) using teletypes, or
did you use the graphical Imlac terminals?  Maybe also VT52 text
terminals?

As an aside, much later your group acquired some VAXstation 100
terminals.  Which led to Bob Scheifler starting the X Window System,
so CLU had a big impact on how graphics is done on Unix.

One of your students, Alan Snyder, worked a while at Bell Labs and
wrote a C compiler.  Did his work on C influence CLU?

One last question before the hello world demo.  Have you seen the 1982
movie TRON?  It has a character named CLU, and the script was written
by Alan Kay's wife, so it's a short mental leap to associate it with
your programming language.  Do you know if there is a connection?

(share screen)

This is a terminal emulator connected to a PDP-10 emulator running
ITS.  And thanks to files from backup tapes stored at MIT we have a
version of CLU from 1978.

(log in)

Your group wrote their own text editor called TED.  Was that your
preferred editor?  Did you also use TECO, RMODE, or EMACS?

(start emacs, M-X CLU mode)

hello = proc()
    file$puts(file$tyo(), "Hello world!\n") %Newline like in C?
end hello

clu^K
help
compile hello
quit
quit_()

^F to see HELLO BIN

At this point we might expect to use a linker, but as far as I
understand there wasn't one at this point.  So we'll load the compiled
file another way.

clusys^K

fload("hello bin"), same as Muddle.
hello()

But we can do better than this.  We can make a standalone executable
program.

start_up = proc() %Like main in C.
    hello()
    quit_()
end start_up

:clu hello
clusys^K
fload("hello")
gc_pure_dump("ts hello")

^F to see TS HELLO

hello^K
